= Aegis - role-based permissions for your user models

Aegis allows you to manage fine-grained, complex permission for user accounts in a central place.

== Installation

Add the following to your <tt>Initializer.run</tt> block in your <tt>environment.rb</tt>:
    config.gem 'thelinuxlich-aegis', :lib => 'aegis'
Then do a 
    sudo rake gems:install

Alternatively, use
    sudo gem install thelinuxlich-aegis

== Changes in this fork
WARNING! Opinionated stuff!
Now you can set the permission prefix, admin and crud verbs with your locale(default is 'may','admin','read','write','update' and 'destroy', respectively)
Example: in locale/en.yml:
  aegis:
    permission: 'should'
    admin: 'manage'
    read: 'access'
    write: 'insert'
    update: 'update'
    destroy: 'delete'

And then you can verify authorization with current_user.should_access_posts?

Also, there is a class method you can put on ApplicationController(or anything that extends ActionController::Base) to automatically add before_filter to all REST actions verifying authorization:
  authorize_first!(:current_user, options)
  
  First parameter is a string containing the method to access the current user on your favorite authentication gem, second parameter accepts :except => [ARRAY_OF_CONTROLLER_NAMES]

The user class now can call has_role :special_permissions => true, and it will add a has_many association with special_permissions to really customize what every role can access.

In Permissions class, you can add restful_permissions!(:except => [ARRAY_OF_CONTROLLER_NAMES]) and it will add the 4 crud verbs to verify permission with every role, first verifying if the current user has admin access then verifying in SpecialPermission association.
Example: Imagine we have a controller called Posts. It will add the permission methods may_read_posts?, may_write_posts?, may_update_posts?, may_destroy_posts?, all customizable with locales.

For special permissions, you'll also need a table for it. Create a migration like this:
  class CreateSpecialPermissions < ActiveRecord::Migration
    def self.up
      create_table :special_permissions do |t|
        t.integer :user_id
        t.string :permission_module
        t.boolean :permission_read, :default => false
        t.boolean :permission_write, :default => false
        t.boolean :permission_destroy, :default => false
        t.boolean :permission_update, :default => false
        t.timestamps
      end
    end
  
    def self.down
      drop_table :special_permissions
    end
  end

Until I fix the generator, the migration part is manual, unfortunately :(

== Example 

First, let's define some roles:

    # app/models/permissions.rb
    class Permissions < Aegis::Permissions

      role :guest
      role :registered_user
      role :moderator
      role :administrator, :default_permission => :allow
      
      permission :edit_post do |user, post|
        allow :registered_user do
          post.creator == user      # a registered_user can only edit his own posts
        end
        allow :moderator
      end
      
      permission :read_post do |post|
        allow :everyone
        deny :guest do
          post.private?             # guests may not read private posts
        end
      end

    end


Now we assign roles to users. For this, the users table needs to have a string
column +role_name+.

    # app/models/user.rb
    class User
      has_role
    end


These permissions may be used in views and controllers:
    
    # app/views/posts/index.html.erb
    @posts.each do |post|
      <% if current_user.may_read_post? post %>
        <%= render post %>
        <% if current_user.may_edit_post? post %>
          <%= link_to 'Edit', edit_post_path(post) %>
        <% end %>
      <% end %>
    <% end %>


    # app/controllers/posts_controller.rb
    class PostsController
      # ...

      def update
        @post = Post.find(params[:id])
        current_user.may_edit_post! @post    # raises an Aegis::PermissionError for unauthorized access
        # ...
      end

    end

== Details

=== Roles

To equip a (user) model with any permissions, you simply call *has_role* within
the model:
    class User < ActiveRecord::Base
      has_role
    end
Aegis assumes that the corresponding database table has a string-valued column
called +role_name+. You may override the name with the <tt>:name_accessor =>
:my_role_column</tt> option.

You can define a default role for a model by saying
    class User < ActiveRecord::Base
      has_role :default => :admin
    end
All this will do, is initialize the +role_name+ with the given default when
<tt>User.new</tt> is called.

The roles and permissions themselves are defined in a class inheriting from
<b>Aegis::Permissions</b>. To define roles you create a model <tt>permissions.rb</tt>
and use the *role* method:
    class Permissions < Aegis::Permissions
      role 'role_name'
    end

By default, users belonging to this role are not permitted anything. You may
override this with <tt>:default_permission => :allow</tt>, e.g.
    role 'admin', :default_permission => :allow

=== Permissions

Permissions are specified with the *permission* method and *allow* and *deny*
    permission :do_something do
        allow :role_a, :role_b
        deny :role_c
    end

Your user model just received two methods called <b>User#may_do_something?</b>
and <b>User#may_do_something!</b>. The first one with the ? returns true for users with
+role_a+ and +role_b+, and false for users with +role_c+. The second one with the ! raises an
Aegis::PermissionError for +role_c+.

=== Normalization

Aegis will perform some normalization. For example, the permissions
+edit_something+ and +update_something+ will be the same, each granting both 
<tt>may_edit_something?</tt> and <tt>may_update_something?</tt>. The following normalizations
are active:
* edit = update
* show = list = view = read
* delete = remove = destroy

=== Complex permissions (with parameters)
 
*allow* and *deny* can also take a block that may return +true+ or +false+
indicating if this really applies. So
    permission :pull_april_fools_prank do
      allow :everyone do
        Date.today.month == 4 and Date.today.day == 1
      end
    end
will generate a <tt>may_pull_april_fools_prank?</tt> method that only returns true on
April 1.

This becomes more useful if you pass parameters to a <tt>may_...?</tt> method, which
are passed through to the permission block (together with the user object). This
way you can define more complex permissions like
    permission :edit_post do |current_user, post|
      allow :registered_user do
        post.owner == current_user
      end
      allow :admin
    end
which will permit admins and post owners to edit posts.

=== For your convenience

As a convenience, if you create a permission ending in a plural 's', this
automatically includes the singular form. That is, after
    permission :read_posts do
      allow :everyone
    end
<tt>.may_read_post? @post</tt> will return true, as well.

If you want to grant +create_something+, +read_something+, +update_something+
and +destroy_something+ permissions all at once, just use
    permission :crud_something do
      allow :admin
    end

If several permission blocks (or several allow and denies) apply to a certain
role, the later one always wins. That is
    permission :do_something do
      deny :everyone
      allow :admin
    end
will work as expected.

=== Our stance on multiple roles per user

We believe that you should only distinguish roles that have different ways of resolving their permissions. A typical set of roles would be

* anonymous guest (has access to nothing with some exceptions)
* signed up user (has access to some things depending on its attributes and associations)
* administrator (has access to everything)

We don't do multiple, parametrized roles like "leader for project #2" and "author of post #7". 
That would be reinventing associations. Just use a single :user role and let your permission block
query regular associations and attributes.

=== Credits

Henning Koch, Tobias Kraze

{link www.makandra.de}[http://www.makandra.de/]
